Title: The Android Problem
Date: 2016-9-28
Category: Tech
tags: 30 Day Challenge, Mobile
Author: Frank Hrach


I have a somewhat mixed history with smartphones. Initially, I didn't see the point in them at all and stuck with
my flip-phone until sometime around 2011, my hesitation being mostly due to power concerns and not wanting my GPS,
phone, calendar, and audio player running out of battery all at once. Needless to say I stopped caring about that
issue and simply devised ways to prevent the device from ever running out of power. I clearly remember my first
phone, the HTC Inspire. Sadly, that phone was released right before Android started to essentially require a
dual-core processor; I only had about six months to a year of comfortable usage out of it before it was painfully
obvious that the phone was not powerful enough for the operating system of the day.


In 2013, I switched to a Nokia Lumia 920. Call me crazy, but that has been without a doubt, the best phone I've
ever had. Sure, Windows Phone had net to no applications and market share, but the build quality was excellent, the
camera superb, and the battery life is still the longest of any phone I've owned to date. Sadly, the digitizer died
on that phone in 2015 and due to the cost of the repair, I simply purchased a new phone. (Though if anyone wants a
used Lumia 920 with a broken digitizer, contact me, I'm willing to sell. The phone still works amazingly
otherwise).


My next phone was the Lumia 935, a budget phone I bought for $50. I discovered that Windows Phone shines on
lower-end devices as there was virtually no difference in experience between my top-of-the-line 920 and the
bargain-bin 935, save for a few luxury features such as an ambient light sensor to automatically change screen
brightness. I intended for the 935 to be a hold-over until the eventual release of the 950 later that year, but
that's not exactly what happened. The 950 eventually ended up being released, but at the absolutely insane price-point
of $599. The closest competitor I saw as the Google Nexus 5X, for a measly $399 by comparison. Needless to say, I
jumped ship for and was on Android once again.


Being back on Android made me realize an important thing: Android is incredibly open and yet incredibly closed at
the same time. Time and time again, I came to realize that what I, and most people, think of as "Android" is
actually Google's Ecosystem, and with each update the two become more and more difficult to separate. Quite
possibly, the best example I can think of is Google Now. For the unaware, Google Now is a digital assistant and
wrapper around Google's search engine. It can do many useful things such as tell you about flights, remind you to
pay bills, and remind you to leave for appointments. To accomplish all of these tasks, it requires access to your
email and calendar, however, there is no way to add a third party service for either of these. I have used Outlook
for my calendar for many, many, years, even longer than Google has even *had* a calendar application and switching
is too much work, but, Google Now simply cannot read a non-google calendar, and does not appear to have a way to
add a remote calendar from their web interface.


This upsets me, since Android used to be hailed as the alternative to iOS where the user had control over their
experience and Google used to embrace and support that. However, the Android of today is no different than iOS,
with Google desperately trying to keep more more people in their walled-garden of services instead of supporting
alternative as they once did. Perhaps I'll take the plunge and install a custom ROM in the future, but for now,
I'll complain about it on the internet.
