Title: Dynamic Music in Games
Date: 2016-10-3
Category: Gaming
tags: 30 Day Challenge, Music
Author: Frank Hrach


With the recent release of Doom 2016's soundtrack, I felt that it was time to look at one of the most severely
under appreciated aspects of video games: the soundtrack. Like in movies, a good soundtrack matches the tone of the
game and helps get the player in the proper mindset and prime them to feel certain ways. For example, survival
horror games tend to have very subtle ambient music throughout most of the game, building up a sense of tension
until the big scare happens where the music will suddenly switch to loud, jarring notes just like in any good
horror film.


Video games have been using music to set the tone as long as the technology has allowed them to. The NES was the
first console which had the capacity to play complex enough sounds in sequence to make music, and it didn't take
long for developers to utilize that capability to improve the experience for the player. It wasn't quite possible
to have dynamic music at the time, but, developers began to pick music to match the overall tone of each stage.
Take Megaman II for example: It isn't difficult to hear the industrial and hard rock influence on Metal Man's stage
theme.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/60c0Jv-VnJ0" frameborder="0"
allowfullscreen></iframe>

The gameplay of the stage matches the tone of the music perfectly. Megaman is always in motion, moving conveyor
belts dragging him left and right constantly as enemies engage him across the screen nearly at all times.


Then, take Bubble Man's Theme

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Kj0-aWXkolQ" frameborder="0"
allowfullscreen></iframe>

Bubble Man's stage is a far-cry from Metal Man's, and the difference in the music shows. Instead of a constant
fight against moving platforms and constantly shooting enemies, the biggest nuisance in Bubble Man's stage is the
spikes and difficult jumps. This is reflected in the more laid back, and almost calming atmosphere. The song is
almost playful and jumpy, taking a bit of the edge off of quite a few of the difficult jumps in the stage.


And it's impossible to talk about Mega Man II without mentioning the famous Wily Castle 1 & 2 theme:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/N4VtxWRfPOk" frameborder="0"
allowfullscreen></iframe>

This theme is so well know because it's both awesome to listen to and perfectly sets the tone for the final stretch
of the game. It's triumphant, with his goal in sight, Megaman charges forward towards the final boss. It's ominous,
with certain parts creating a sense of dread of the difficult challenge ahead. It's upbeat, creating a powerful
sense of confidence in the player, pumping them up for the rest of the gauntlet.


As technology improved, it became possible to store enough music on a cartage to have more dynamic music which
changed to fit what was happening on screen more effectively.


TODO: Example from the 16-Bit Era


By the late 1990's, it was computationally possible to easily store and process vast amounts of audio data,
allowing for game soundtracks to become more vibrant and advanced once more. With compact disks it was possible to
stream recorded music in-game. Many games had also began to look and feel closer to reality. While the designs and
art styles could still be cartoon-ish at times, but it was also the beginning of near realistic graphics and
environments. With this, came a change in music style. Quickly, the very noticeable and iconic music of old was
replaced with mostly ambient and cinematic scores. This was the era of games chasing the Hollywood dream, so to
speak. However, this also was an age of increased storage capacity for all memory types. Finally, it was possible
to have truly dynamic music which responded to the player.


TODO: Notable examples of soundtracks in the 2000s


The 2010s continued the trend of cinematic scores, though, the market decisively split into the AAA and indie
markets, both which had their own focus for both gameplay and soundtrack design. The indie scene tended to invoke
nostalgia, with many notable soundtracks being modern mixes of NES and Genesis chiptunes.


TODO: Talk about notable indie soundtracks


This brings me to Doom (2016). Doom's soundtrack is, in my opinion, the single best video game soundtrack in the
last 10 years. This is a bold claim, but the way that the music seamlessly flows from one event to another to mold
the action fits perfectly, matching the ebb and flow of the virtual carnage perfectly. At its core, the soundtrack
builds on itself. During the majority of the level, there is a quiet, subtle, ambient soundtrack. When the player
enters an encounter, the music adds a few layers and enters what I'll refer to "combat mode". The tempo picks up,
more tracks are added, and the general tension of the song increases. Then, if the encounter is multiple waves, the
music will begin in honest with heavy-guitar riffs, blaring industrial-electronic sounds, and a pounding bass line.
